[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. In our last
video, we had a look at Farey sequences and
their relationship with Ford circles, getting
at the idea that the rational numbers are not
at all uniform as one might think, but rather
have a layered structure that one can go deeper
and deeper into the more work we do. We're going
to continue with that theme today and introduce
another closely related mathematical object going
back to the 19th century, around 1860. This was
a joint discovery of a German mathematician,
Moritz Stern, and a French clockmaker, Brocot.
Stern was the successor of Gauss at Göttingen.
They both discovered this particular tree,
which is a configuration made up of lots of
rational numbers, in fact, fractions. They're
all positive, and it has remarkable properties
and gives us some insight into the structure
of the rational numbers. So we're going to
have a look today at the Stern-Brocot tree.
Okay, so what we see here is, first of
all, a sort of starting point: 1/1. Well,
it's not quite a starting point—it seems
to be coming from these two elements here
and then branching out either to the left or to
the right at each point. So it's a binary tree,
meaning that as we go down, every element has
two below it: one going out to the left and
one going out to the right. For example, if
we go left from 1/1, or 1 over 1, we get 1/2,
and then if we go right, we get 2/3. If we go
left again, we get 3/5, 5/8, and so on. If we
go down the left-hand side, we get 1/2, 1/3,
1/4, 1/5, 1/6, and so on. The pattern is pretty
clear. And if we go down the right-hand side,
we get 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and so on. So we're
getting arbitrarily large fractions as well
as arbitrarily small fractions close to zero.
Okay, so how is this tree constructed,
and what are some of its attributes? Well, the
key idea is that to go from one layer to the next,
we need this idea of a mediant. Basically, we're
taking the mediant of the things that have been
constructed at a certain stage in order to get to
the next stage. Just to give you an idea of that:
for example, where does the 7/5 come from? Well,
the 7/5 is a little bit to the right of 4/3, and
it's a little bit to the left of 3/2. And if you
take the mediant between these two fractions—and
I remind you that means you add the numerators
and you add the denominators—then you get 7/5.
Similarly, 8/5 is the mediant of 3/2 and 5/3.
What about 5/4? Where does it come from? Well,
it's the mediant of the term that's closest to it
on the right, which is 4/3, and the term that's
closest to it above it, to the left. So what's
above it to the left? 1/1. And the mediant of
1/1 with 4/3 is 5/4. That gives you a rough
idea of how we construct the Stern-Brocot tree.
These two objects here are somehow starting
points: they are 0/1 and 1/0. 1/0 is not a
proper fraction, but for the purposes of this
Stern-Brocot tree, we're going to treat it as
if it were a fraction. The mediant of this and
this is the 1/1, which is how we generate the
topmost element in the tree. To generate ones
along the left-hand side, we take the mediant
between any one of these and 0/1 to get the
next one. And to go down the right-hand side,
we take the mediant of this one with this one
to get the next one down the Stern-Brocot tree.
So let me now more clearly explain how
we build up this Stern-Brocot tree,
one layer at a time. We start with the
pseudo-fractions 0/1 and 1/0. Admittedly,
this is not a proper fraction, but we're going
to treat it as if it were. Then the next stage,
we insert the mediant of these two objects,
which is 1/1, and we put the 1/1 in between
these two pseudo-fractions. And now what we do
is we construct more sequences at each stage,
adding the mediant of all adjacent neighboring
fractions. So, for example, the next stage,
we would take the mediant of these two, which is
1/2, and we would insert it between these two. And
we would take the mediant of these two, which
is 2/1, and insert that between these two. So,
unlike the process of generating the Farey
sequences, we take all mediants between
neighboring elements that we have and insert them
between the two elements that are creating them.
For example, at the next stage, we take
the mediant of these two, which is 1/3,
and put it in between these two. Between here
and here, we take the mediant, which is 2/3.
Between here and here, the mediant is 3/2,
so it fits there. And between here and here,
the mediant is 3/1, so it fits there. So
generating these rows is very straightforward—we
just insert all mediants between any two
neighboring elements in the sequence.
So, for example, at the next stage, we would
end up with this sequence where I've shown
you in green the new elements that have
been added to the previous sequence. So
the 2/5 was added because it was the
mediant of 1/3 and 1/2, so it gets
put in between 1/3 and 1/2. We can continue
generating more and more of these sequences.
But how do we actually build that binary tree from
these sequences? The rule is that we record these
numbers as we generate them one by one. And what
we do is we take any fraction a/b that appears,
and below it are the two new fractions
introduced to the left and right of
a/b at the step directly after a/b is
introduced. So let me try to explain that.
In the previous stage, 2/3 was introduced. Let's
have a look at 2/3—that came from the previous
sequence. It was actually the mediant of 1/2 and
1/1. So suppose we've created the tree up to this
level—we've created 2/3, and it's in position.
Now, after we do 2/3 in the previous row,
in this stage here, we create the 3/5 and the
3/4, which are the mediants of 2/3 with 1/2
and 2/3 with 1/1. So those two new objects
that are created, they're created from 2/3,
which was the latest new one. They emanate now
from 2/3: one to the left, which is smaller,
and one to the right, which is bigger. So the
3/5 was actually the mediant of 2/3 with 1/2,
and the 3/4 was the mediant of 2/3 with 1/1.
So at the next stage, if we want to figure out
what's going to happen below 3/4, well, at
the next stage, after the 3/4 is produced,
the next stage will give us 5/7, the mediant
between these two, so that will occur to this side
of 3/4. And also 4/5 to this side of 3/4—that's
what we put below 3/4 at the next stage. And below
3/5 at the next stage, well, we would get the
mediant 5/8 on this side and 4/7 on this side.
So let's see how it goes in practice. Let's
actually generate the first few rows of this
Stern-Brocot tree. So we're starting with
our pseudo-fractions 1/0 and 0/1, and their
mediant is 1/1. Alright, so the next row means
that we have to find the mediant of these two,
and we'll put it halfway between them, below this
one. The mediant is 1/2, and the mediant between
these two, we'll put halfway, and it's 2/1, and
these are both less than this one. Okay, good.
Now, below 1/2, well, in the sequence that
we've got so far, 0/1 and 1/2 are neighbors,
so their mediant will be 1/3, which we'll put
here. And the mediant between these two is 2/3,
which we'll put here. The mediant
between these two is 3/2, which
we'll put here. And the mediant between
these two is 3/1, which we'll put here.
Okay, now at the next stage, each one of these
is going to have two children. So this one,
one of its neighbors in the sequence
as we sort of read from left to right,
is this one here, and its other neighbor is this
one here. So we have to take the mediant between
these two and the mediant between these two, and
those are the children of 1/3. So the mediant here
is 1/4, and the mediant here is 2/5. How about
this one's children? Well, with this one here,
which is its leftmost neighbor in the sequence,
we get a mediant of 3/5. And with this one and
this one, the mediant is 3/4. And then
also, this one will have two children,
and this one will have two children, and it's
not too hard to see that everything is going to
be reciprocated over here—we're going to get the
reciprocals of the ones that we got here. Let's
check that. So the mediant of 1/3 and 3/2 will be
4/3—that's the reciprocal of that one. The mediant
between these two is 5/3—that's the reciprocal of
that one. Here the mediant is 5/2, which is the
reciprocal of that one, and here the mediant
is 4/1, which is the reciprocal of this one.
Okay, so now, as a complete sequence, we could
read from left to right: this one, then this one,
then this one, then this one, this one, this
one, this one, this one, this one, then this one,
this one, this one, this one, this one, this
one, and this one. They're staggered up and down,
but that's still the order in which they appear.
Alright, let's see if we do one more. Children
here, here, here, here, here, here, here,
and here. And I'll just do the first half
and then take reciprocals. So the mediant between
these two is 1/5; between these ones is 2/7;
these ones are 3/8; these ones are 3/7. And
then between these two, because after this one,
as we move left to right, we go from here to
here. So 4/7 over there; the mediant here is 5/8;
the mediant here is 5/7; the mediant here is 4/5,
and here we should get the reciprocals: so 5/4,
7/5, 8/5, 7/4, 7/3, 8/3, 7/2, and 5/1. So that's
how we generate the Stern-Brocot tree as a binary
tree. We think of this as the top node, although
there are these sort of pseudo-nodes above it,
but as a binary tree, this is the apex. At
every stage, we have two branches coming out;
at every stage, all the numbers that we've
created form a—well, there's first of all a row,
but all of them in their entirety can
still be thought of as a linear sequence.
We're now going to have a look at some properties
of the Stern-Brocot tree. I'm going to list these
properties and I'm going to leave them mostly
to you as some exercises to try to prove or
understand why these properties are true. Some of
them are rather subtle and require some serious
thinking to see why they are true. So this is
a great research project. I think, generally,
the Stern-Brocot tree, while well appreciated
in certain circles, is not as widely appreciated
as it ought to be, which probably means there
are quite a lot of more interesting properties
that have not yet been discovered. So maybe
you'll be able to discover some yourself.
The most interesting property, I guess,
that pops out at one is this one:
if we exclude the pseudo-fractions that we
started with, every fraction—in other words,
every rational number greater than zero—appears
exactly once in the Stern-Brocot tree,
and in reduced form. It's a remarkable
and beautiful property of this tree.
Another important but somewhat more
obvious property is that the order—the
numerical order—is respected by the
horizontal positions. In other words,
larger fractions appear to
the right of smaller ones.
Another property that we've already mentioned
is that each row of the tree is symmetrical with
respect to taking reciprocals. So, for example,
this was one of the rows that we created,
and we already noticed things like 1/4 here is
reflected with the 4/1 on this side. So there's a
symmetry around the center given by reciprocation,
just interchanging numerator and denominators.
For the next few properties, we need a
definition. Let us say that two fractions, a/b
and c/d in reduced form, are adjacent precisely
when ad - bc equals either +1 or -1. In that case,
we will say that the two fractions,
a/b and c/d, are adjacent fractions.
So we're introducing the idea of adjacent
fractions. Notice that this is pretty close to
the rule for equality of fractions. If this
expression happened to be zero, then we would
know that these two fractions or rational numbers
were in fact identical. So adjacent fractions are
ones which are not identical but which are pretty
well as close to being identical as possible in
the sense that this quantity, ad - bc, is as close
as possible to zero without actually being zero.
Alright, so our next property is this one: that
any two neighbors in the Stern-Brocot tree are
adjacent. And what I mean by neighbor now is
that they are connected by a bond or an edge
of the tree. So, for example, this is part of the
tree—there's 1/2, and one of its children is 2/3,
so there's a bond or an edge between 1/2 and
2/3. And this property is saying that these
guys are actually adjacent fractions. We can
check that by taking 1 * 3 - 2 * 2—that's -1,
so those guys are indeed adjacent.
The children of 2/3 are 3/5 and 3/4,
and they are also both adjacent to 2/3 because 2
* 5 - 3 * 3 is 1, and because 2 * 4 - 3 * 3 is -1.
For our next property, we make another definition
or notion. We observe that when we look at the
tree below, every number that appears in the tree
creates a region in the plane carved out. Namely,
it's the region—this sort of connected
region—that's directly below. If we imagine sort
of joining all the dots, it's like a fence. Then
that fence would prevent us from going from here
to here, but we could go down the fence actually
quite as far as we wanted to. So we'll call this
region here, which only depends on 2/3, "R sub
2/3." So this is the region controlled by 2/3,
if you like. So every node or every point or every
number in the Stern-Brocot tree creates a region
in the plane, which is cut out by
the sort of successive children
that you get by going left and then
right, and then right and then right,
and so on—or right and then left and left and
left and left and left, and so on. So this is
our notation: if we have a fraction s, then
the region corresponding to it is R sub s.
And now, another property is that every fraction,
r, on the boundary of R sub s is adjacent
to s. So in other words, if we look at 2/3 here
and look at all the fractions that are on the
boundary of R sub 2/3, which includes not just
the children but also some of their children
and some of their children, and so on, that all
these numbers here are all adjacent to 2/3. So,
for example, 2/3 is adjacent to 5/7. What does
that mean? It means that 2 * 7 - 3 * 5 is,
in this case, -1. Or 2/3 is adjacent to 7/10
because 2 * 10 - 3 * 7 is also -1. Same thing
with 7/11: 2 * 11 - 3 * 7 is +1. So there are
as many adjacent fractions as you like—just
keep going down here on the boundary of R sub
2/3, and you get more and more fractions which
are adjacent to 2/3. They'll be getting
bigger and bigger as we keep going down.
Our next property concerns a certain
notion of simplicity of a fraction. So
suppose that a/b is a fraction in reduced
form. Let's define the simplicity of r
to be the number l(r), which is 1/(ab). So we take
the product of the numerator and the denominator,
we take the reciprocal of that, and we call that
the simplicity of the rational number. So if the
numerator and denominator are big, then ab is
big, and 1/(ab) will be a very small number,
close to zero, which means that its
simplicity is very small—it does not
have a lot of simplicity. This might suggest
that we should call ab the "complexity," which
makes a lot of sense. But we're only going to be
needing the simplicity for this next property,
which is that the sum of the simplicities
along any row of the Stern-Brocot tree is 1.
So here's a row of the Stern-Brocot
tree: 1/3, 2/3, 3/2, 3/1. Just when we
read along horizontally along one of the
rows, the simplicity of this is 1/(13),
so 1/3. The simplicity of this one is 1/6 because
23 is 6. Similarly, this is 1/6, and this is 1/3,
and they add up to one. This result has been
attributed by Alex Bogomolny to Pierre Lamothe,
a Canadian musical theorist. I think this
is lovely—I think Pierre discovered this
in the context of some investigations with music
theory. And I should say that Alex Bogomolny is
rather famous for his wonderful website called
"Cut The Knot," and if you haven't been to it,
I suggest that you have a look and check it
out. It's a great compilation of all kinds of
interesting mathematics, in particular, lots of
lovely geometry, which Alex has exhibited very
clearly with lots of beautiful applets. Okay, so
you can spend hours and hours or days and days
going through this site—lots of good stuff there.
And if Pierre ever watches one of these videos,
I wouldn't mind him telling us how he
stumbled upon this thing and what the
relationship with music theory is. I
think that's a very interesting issue.
Okay, another property is that if we start
from 1/1, and let's say we happen to move
left and then right, and then left and right and
left—so denoted by L R L R L—and down the tree,
the fractions that appear are these ones
here: 1/1, 1/2, 2/3, 3/5, 5/8, 8/13,
13/21. And we see that these are the Fibonacci
numbers, and we might call this a Fibonacci path.
On the first slide of this lecture, you saw that
path in red sort of zigzagging down. Of course,
there's another one, sort of the reciprocal
path. If we started right, left, right,
right, left, right, left, then we
would get a similar kind of thing,
but with all the reciprocals. We could
call that the other Fibonacci path.
Now, it seems to me it's possible, or perhaps
very likely, that this particular sequence down
the tree has some special, interesting properties.
In particular, just a very bit of investigation
suggests that this sequence could contain the
numbers along every row which are maximum for
the sum of the numerator and denominator,
as well as the product of the numerator
and denominator—this being the complexity,
perhaps, of the rational number, in keeping
with the definition of simplicity. So maybe some
of you can check this out for me and see if this
is true. If you go down further in this tree,
is it still true that if you go along any row,
the ones with the maximum sum of numerator and
denominator or maximum product of numerator and
denominator are always in this Fibonacci path or
its reciprocal? And can you prove it if it's true?
Our last property is a small observation
I've made—it's no doubt well known by
the people who have looked a lot at the
Stern-Brocot tree. If a/b is in reduced form,
suppose we define the total of r to be, say,
T(r), which is the sum of a and b. It's a little
bit different from the complexity—we'll call
this the total of the fraction. Then the sum
of the totals along any row is twice a power
of three. More specifically, the sum for the
nth row—that is, the row beginning with 1/n—is
2 * 3^(n-1). So, for example, this row here,
the sum of the totals is 4 + 5 + 5 + 4, which
is 18, which is 2 * 3^2. So as an exercise,
you might like to prove this. And a hint—you
can use induction. And a sort of related kind
of thing: you could prove that the sum of the
first half of any row—that is, if you just add
up the fractions themselves in a simple-minded
way—then the sum of the first half of any row is
a power of two. And you might also try to figure
out what is the sum of the second half of any row.
Now, there are probably a lot more properties
that can be established and discovered,
and I think it's sort of a fun exercise
if you have some interest in number
theory and patterns and arithmetic. The
Stern-Brocot tree is understudied—there
are lots of beautiful things that are probably
waiting to be discovered about this object.
Now let's connect the Stern-Brocot tree
to the Ford circles that we had a look at
in our last video, which is also the topic
of Math Foundations 14. So here's a picture
of part of the Ford circles: there's 0,
1, 2, 3, and so on. Here is the x-axis
with our rational numbers spread out around here.
Here's the y-axis with 1/2 here and 1 here. And
here are the biggest Ford circles—one
above every integer. For convenience,
we're going to kind of rub out this 0 one; we're
going to ignore it, and so we'll start out with
the circle above the number 1. So its point
here is 1 1/2. The way we get the Stern-Brocot
tree from this is we're going to move either
left or right from the center of one circle
to the center of an adjacent, touching circle.
And what we're going to do is, at each stage,
we're going to move left or right to the biggest
tangential circle of lesser or equal diameter.
So starting here, if we move right, well, then we
move to this equal-sized circle. We go from here
to here, and then another right—we go from here to
here, and so on. Moving left, well, this one here
we've rubbed out, so it's not there, so we have
to go down here to this one here. Alright, so this
one here is the circle above 1/2. If we go left
from this one, we're not going to go back to this
one. We're always going to go to some new circle
that we haven't gone to before—we want a tree. So
we're going to go down to the next biggest circle
that we haven't gone to, which is touching this
one, which is to the left, which is this one here.
So left would go there; from here, left would go
there; and then from this point, left would take
us to this circle here, which is touching to the
left, and the next biggest one. Right would take
us down here to the next biggest one; and then
from here, left to this one, right to this one;
from here, left to this one, right to this one.
So at this stage, there's always two circles
that are touching, which are the biggest,
and we're moving to those biggest ones which
are touching directly that we haven't gone
to before. And please check out that we recover
the Stern-Brocot tree this way. So this is really
the number 1; this is the number 1/2; over
here is 2/3; over here is 1/3; here is 1/4;
2/5, and so on. So the Stern-Brocot tree is
very nicely contained in these Ford circles.
This also, by the way, allows us to connect
the Stern-Brocot tree with the Farey sequences
because we saw that the Farey sequences
are what we get when we go down a certain
level and then start going across and sort of
recording all of the circles that we meet as we
go from 0 to 1 at a certain level. So you see
there's some interaction between the Farey
sequences and the Stern-Brocot tree, but it's
a little bit subtle because the Stern-Brocot
tree is kind of going down and sort of crosses
any Farey sequence path. So all these notions
kind of come together pleasantly, I think, in this
picture with the Ford circles, illustrating again
that there's a very natural and interesting
deep structure here of the rational numbers.
So coming back once more to the Stern-Brocot tree,
let's have another look at it. We've talked quite
a lot about some of its interesting properties,
but there's a couple of interesting questions
that we haven't addressed yet. One of them is,
how do we generate a part of this tree if we
start at some particular rational number?
Suppose we just start at 4/3, and we ask,
what are the children of it? How do we get 5/4
and 7/5 from 4/3? Of course, it's not hard if we
already know that above 4/3 is 3/2, and above 4/3
over here is 1/1. But suppose we just start with
4/3 itself—how do we go down? That's a reasonably
interesting question, which is not so obvious,
and maybe you'd like to think about that.
That's an interesting little challenge.
There's something else that we need to
address—there's another problem that we've
skirted here. Can you think of what it is? So this
is a course in the foundations of mathematics. We
want to set things up in exactly the right way; we
don't want to leave any little blemishes anywhere
on the landscape. Our opinion is that if we do
mathematics right, it all makes 100% sense—not
99%, not 99.5%. It makes 100% sense if you
do things the right way. And if it doesn't
make 100% sense, if there's even a little
bit of problematic aspect to your theory,
it's because you have not understood your theory
correctly yet. So what is the problem? There is
a nagging issue here that I hope is bothering
some of you. The nagging issue is this thing:
what is 1/0? We've used 1/0 to generate part of
this tree. We've used 1/0, for example, to take
the mediant of this one with this to get 3/1, and
then the mediant of this with this to get 4/1,
and so on. This is not a fraction—this is some
kind of strange object. What's it doing here? Now,
we shouldn't just shake our heads and say,
"Well, that's just the way it is; you know,
mathematics has quirks." No, we should try
to understand what's going on here—it means
that our understanding is not yet at the level
where we are completely in control of things.
So next time, we're going to have a look at this
issue, and it's going to open up another aspect
of this deep structure of rational numbers. We're
going to talk about a matrix formulation of the
Stern-Brocot tree, and then I'm going to introduce
a new theory called "Wedge Theory." Wedge theory
is very close to the Stern-Brocot tree, but there
are some rather strange, very narrow kinds of
objects that appear. So I hope you'll join me for
that. I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]